*TIPS ON HOW TO WRITE A STATEMENT OF PURPOSE (SOP)*
I recently posted about my PPR and got a lot of queries regarding SOP. I changed my field of study a bit and I also most of my professional experience was not related to my field, but I managed to secure admission and then satisfied the visa officer through my SOP.
We all know this is one the most important part and it is imperative to submit SOP with you visa application. I thought it might be helpful if I make a detailed post for students who are facing issues in writing their SOP. I will try my best to explain it and guide as per my knowledge. Apologies in advance for the lengthy post.
Why is it important? Visa officers who have got your file do not know you and cannot judge your profile unless a picture is drawn in front of them. This document is your portfolio and your story that the visa officer is interested to read. The compulsory documents will be the same for everyone, but SOP is where you will stand out to justify and explain yourself.
Who is it important for? Although it is important for everyone who applying for a study permit, a special devotion and hard work is required for the students who are looking to change their field of study, have a study gap or have a professional experience that is not relevant to their intended field of study.
Why do we find it difficult to write our SOP? Firstly, English is not our native language and many of us find it difficult to express ourselves as needed. Secondly, this is something we do not come across frequently and most of us haven't written it before. The other reason is we are not aware of how to write it down and what to cover in it. We all might have different points in mind that we wish to convey but we find it difficult to pen it down.
Can somebody else help me in writing it? In my opinion, you are the best person to express yourself. A consultant or any other person can never know you any better regardless of how much you pay them. YOU NEED TO HAVE A DRAFT before you seek any help. I would say just write it down however you can and try to cover all the points you have in your mind, and as discussed below. Once you have a draft, you can then ask somebody to structure it and use appropriate vocabulary/grammar. I would strongly suggest having your SOP reviewed by someone who is master at it.
How to writing a SOP? I will mention major points to cover along with a short description of each point, so you know what to write in each part. Sequence of paragraphing can be different for different scenarios, but this is how I wrote mine. Length of SOP can vary. Typically, it is of 2-3 pages (depending on what you have got to tell VO).
Paragraph 1:
a- Introduction: Start with a brief introduction of yours.
b- Development of Interest: Now you must start developing your story. Tell how your interest got developed in something very basic related to your intended field of study. This can be any of your childhood activity, father's motivation, etc.
c- Educational background: Write about your primary/secondary education and your last education (Bachelors). Mention some of the subjects you studied and are most relevant to your intended degree (you can also mention grades if they were good) and which of these subjects developed your interest in the field you have applied. You can also write about any relevant projects you worked on.
Paragraph 2:
a- Professional Experience/Study Gap: In this paragraph you must write about what you have done after your last education till date. This includes your professional job experience, any internships you have had during your bachelors or afterwards. If you have any odd job experience which is not relevant to the field of study, then you can either omit it or relate it somehow to your personal development. If you did not have any job for a good amount of time, you will have to justify and explain it. You can do so by writing about something productive that you did. For example, you can write about any courses you took on Coursera, Udemy or even if you have learnt something online.
b- Relate Experience of above jobs/activity: Once you have mentioned the jobs/study gap, you can explain some job responsibilities you had and relate it to your field of interest or course you got accepted into.
Paragraph 3:
a- Academic Objectives/Goals: Once you have built your story above, you now have to write down your academic objectives and goals. Based on the subjects you studied, the interest you developed through jobs, write about what you further want to do or research in this field. Explain the research gap your field of study currently have.
b- Relate your experiences with Goals: Relate your experiences described previously with your goals. For this, you can add diff certifications, workshops, seminars which developed your interest in achieving that goal. End this paragraph by introducing the course you have finally applied into with the majors you will be taking.
Paragraph 4:
a- Introduce your University/College: Write about the university you selected for the course. Do some research on your program for this purpose. For example: You can write about specific courses you liked in this university that were not offered anywhere else, about different labs, mention faculty advisors of your interest, labs, etc.
b- Why this University/College?: Write about other universities you applied and why specifically you have selected this one. You can write about the ranking or other specialties of your program and other benefits like Co-op, etc. For this, again do some research on your university/college.
Paragraph 5:
Why Canada? In this paragraph, you have to convince VO that why are you pursuing Canada and not any other country? Is this course not offered in your home country? What brings you here instead of your home country? For this, you can write about limited resources, technology gap, practical experience, limited research or other reasons depending on your course. You can also write about international students’ life in Canada, its culture, etc. DO NOT WRITE ANYTHING NEGATIVE ABOUT YOUR HOME COUNTRY.
Paragraph 6:
Future Goals: This is a very important section. Many rejections come from here. You must write about your future goals here and what are you going to do with this degree. How is this going to help you when you COME BACK TO PAKISTAN after your graduation. You have to be very concise and clear about what you write here. Make a valid and justifiable plan. You must convince VO that you will return to your home country after graduation. For example: you can tell about the job opportunities you will have once you come back and mention some companies along with good salaries to show your research and knowledge, or you can also write about starting your own business in this field after getting some experience, etc. SHOW CONSISTENCY IN YOUR STORY & MAKE NO BLUNDERS.
Paragraph 7:
a- Introduce you family members/sponsor: Firstly, you can write about the person who is sponsoring you and what he/she does. Explain that your sponsor is well settled, and you are very close to him/her. Again, be concise and clear here to show that you can finance your educations easily. For example: talk about the assets you or your sponsor have and show that you have a handsome amount of monthly income (do not mention amount, you can do so in affidavit of support). You can also write about your siblings and their occupation and write about how close you are to your family to show your bond with family.
b- Ties with your Home country: Again, this is a main part. Explain strong ties with your home country. You have to prove that you are very close to your country and no matter what happens, you will travel back to your country. For example: if you own a property, you can mention it. If you have a contract signed with your previous company, you can show that. Or you can explain the responsibilities you have being the only/eldest/youngest/brightest person in your family who have to look after his home, etc. Think of yourself as a VO and see if your story makes sense or not.
c- Payments (Optional): Although, you have already paid for tuition and GIC, add it here again if you want to let VO know about duration of your program and also mention here if you will be attaching any bank statement with your documents.
Paragraph 8: (Optional)
a- Thank you note: Be thankful to the person who is supporting you. Be thankful to Canadian government and show how excited you are to pursue your studies further.
b- Visa Status: Although VO have all your profile, you can clear and explain them about any previous visa refusal you had (if any). Assure them you are aware of all the rules and regulations of Canadian immigration and will abide by them. That’s the end!
I wish you all the best in writing your SOP and with your application submissions. I understand this might not be a perfect format or a professional one, but I have tried my best. Please don't hesitate to reach out to me if you have any queries.
